V1.0.0 RC (#182)
OWASP/maswe: weaknesses/MASVS-PRIVACY/MASWE-0079.md

---

> title: Unsafe Defaults for Privacy Relevant Actions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Inadequate Defaults for Privacy Relevant Actions
```

id: MASWE-0079
alias: unsafe-defaults-privacy-actions

> requirement: "For privacy relevant actions, the app defaults to the least exposing option appropriate for the requested functionality."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requirement: "The app uses adequate defaults for privacy relevant actions."
```

- https://gdpr-info.eu/recitals/no-26/
- https://gdpr-info.eu/recitals/no-28/
- https://gdpr-info.eu/art-4-gdpr/
- https://www.edpb.europa.eu/topics/ai-and-technology/anonymisation-pseudonymisation_en
- https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2014/wp216_en.pdf
- https://www.statista.com/topics/9460/app-tracking-and-mobile-privacy/
status: new
---

## Overview

This weakness occurs when an app uses defaults for a privacy relevant action that expose more data than is necessary for the expected functionality.

Privacy relevant actions include sharing, exporting, publishing, synchronizing, backing up, changing visibility, responding to a request from another party, or moving data from private app storage to storage or services accessible by other applications, users, or third parties.

The weakness may cause users to disclose different data, disclose data to a broader audience, or create more persistent copies than they reasonably intended. The issue is whether the default configuration results in a more exposing privacy state than is necessary for the requested functionality.

## Modes of Introduction

> - **Overly Exposing Defaults**: The app preselects broader audiences, more data, longer retention, public visibility, or additional recipients when a less exposing default would satisfy the expected functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Oversharing by Default**: Designing sharing flows that expose more than the user intends because privacy-reducing options are off by default or hard to find. For example, forwarding a message or picture that reveals the original sender's name unless the user explicitly enables an option such as "Hide Sender Name".
```

## Impact

- **Violation of User Privacy**: The app can disclose personal or sensitive data to recipients who are not entitled to receive it under the user's sharing choices, resulting in unauthorized exposure of that data.
- **Loss of User Trust**: Users can discover that the app shared more data, or shared it more broadly, than they reasonably expected, resulting in reduced confidence in the app and its owner.
- **Legal and Regulatory Non-Compliance**: The app can share personal data using unnecessarily exposing defaults, resulting in violations of privacy obligations and potential enforcement action.

## Mitigations

> - **Use Privacy Protective Defaults**: Default to the narrowest audience, smallest data set, shortest appropriate persistence, and least exposing destination that supports the requested functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Use Privacy Protective Defaults**: Default to the configuration that shares the least amount of necessary data.```
